---
date: '2025-10-18T19:05:21+11:00'
title: 'Workflow Overview'
weight: 2
---

The basic rigging workflow for APEX is:

1. Create a skeleton (and optionally a guide skeleton)
2. Capture the geometry
3. Pack skin and skeleton for APEX
4. Build rig in APEX
5. Animate the character in the **APEX Scene Animate**


## Skeleton
The skeleton is defined by points with a transform attribute. At base, the points need to have:

- `s@name`: The name of the joint
- `3@transform`: The transform matrix

## Skinning

The other main thing you need to have is a skinned mesh. There are three main ways to capture geometry in Houdini:
- **Joint Capture Biharmonic**: Uses biharmonic weighting to capture the geometry. Usually gives a good base weight with minimal tweaking.
- **Proximity Capture**: Captures based off proximity. Useful for things like cluster weights or simple weighting. 
- **Packed Capture**: Captures packed geometry. This is useful for rigid objects or mechanical rigging. 
There are also the usual array of controls for painting or manipulating weights, however with a bit of forethought it is usually possible to create procedural skin weighting avoiding having to manually paint weights. 

## Packed Folders
For the skin, skeleton and other data to be moved to the APEX environment it needs to be packed. Packed folders act as a containers. While anything can be put into a packed folder there are some conventions that get used by the default autorigs:

- `Base.skel`:  The deformation skeleton.
- `Guides.skel`: The base skeleton, plus helper controls, joints and metadata for the rig. 
- `Base.shp`: The skin  geometry that gets deformed.

And in terms of convention there are some default extensions:
- *skel*: Skeleton Geometry
- *shp*: Geometry (e.g. skin/blend shapes etc)
- *rig*: Rig logic (as we shall see apex rigs are stored as geometry).

Everything used in the animate state is saved as a packed folder. For example:
- Animation curves are primitives in an animation folder, 
- Ragdoll geometry is just an additional shape folder with the collision geometry. - 
- Constraints and locators are just rig logic in a packed folder that gets added to the rig graph. 
- Control Library containing a shape library for the rig controls. 

You can add anything you could need to a packed folder to make it available to the rig; you are not restricted to the a specific set of packed folders. 